# Temporal Data

**Prerequisites**

- Python functions
- GroupBy


**Outcomes**

- Know how pandas handles dates  
- Understand how to parse strings into `datetime` objects  
- Know how to write dates as custom formatted strings  
- Be able to access day, month, year, etc. for a `DateTimeIndex` and
  a column with `dtype` `datetime`  
- Understand both rolling and re-sampling operations and the difference
  between the two  


**Data**

- Bitcoin to USD exchange rates from March 2014 to the present

## Outline

- [Time series](#Time-series)  
  - [Intro](#Intro)  
  - [Parsing Strings as Dates](#Parsing-Strings-as-Dates)  
  - [Date Formatting](#Date-Formatting)  
  - [Extracting Data](#Extracting-Data)  
  - [Accessing Date Properties](#Accessing-Date-Properties)  
  - [Leads and Lags: `df.shift`](#Leads-and-Lags:-`df.shift`)  
  - [Rolling Computations: `.rolling`](#Rolling-Computations:-`.rolling`)  
  - [Changing Frequencies: `.resample`](#Changing-Frequencies:-`.resample`)  
  - [Optional: API keys](#Optional:-API-keys)  
  - [Exercises](#Exercises)

```python
# Uncomment following line to install on colab
#  %pip install quandl
```

```python
import os
import pandas as pd
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import quandl

# see section on API keys at end of lecture!
quandl.ApiConfig.api_key = os.environ.get("QUANDL_AUTH", "Dn6BtVoBhzuKTuyo6hbp")
start_date = "2014-05-01"

%matplotlib inline
# activate plot theme
plt.style.use("ggplot")
```

## Intro

pandas has extensive support for handling dates and times

We will loosely refer to data with date or time information as time series data

Today we'll explore pandas timeseries capabilities

Among these topics are:

- Parsing strings as dates  
- Writing `datetime` objects as (inverse operation of previous point)  
- Extracting data from a DataFrame or Series with date information in
  the index  
- Shifting data through time (taking leads or lags)  
- Re-sampling data to a different frequency and rolling operations  

**NOTE:** here, even more than with previous topics, we will skip a lot of the
functionality pandas offers, and we urge you to refer to the [official
documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/timeseries.html) for
more information

## Parsing Strings as Dates

Dates often come to us as strings

Hopefully, the date strings follow a structured format or pattern

One common pattern is `YYYY-MM-DD`: 4 numbers for the year, 2 for the month, and
2 for the day with each section separated by a `-`

For example, we write Christmas day 2020 in this format as

```python
christmas_str = "2020-12-25"
```

To convert a string into a time-aware object, we use the `pd.to_datetime`
function.

```python
christmas = pd.to_datetime(christmas_str)
print("The type of christmas is", type(christmas))
christmas
```

The `pd.to_datetime` function is pretty smart at guessing the format of the
date…

```python
for date in ["December 25, 2020", "Dec. 25, 2020",
             "Monday, Dec. 25, 2020", "25 Dec. 2020", "25th Dec. 2020"]:
    print("pandas interprets {} as {}".format(date, pd.to_datetime(date)))
```

However, sometimes we will need to give pandas a hint

For example, that same time (midnight on Christmas) would be reported on an
Amazon transaction report as

```python
christmas_amzn = "2020-12-25T00:00:00+ 00 :00"
```

If we try to pass this to `pd.to_datetime`, it will fail

```python
pd.to_datetime(christmas_amzn)
```

To parse a date with this format, we need to specify the `format` argument for
`pd.to_datetime`

```python
christmas_amzn
```

```python
amzn_strftime = "%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%S+ 00 :00"
pd.to_datetime(christmas_amzn, format=amzn_strftime)
```

Can you guess what `amzn_strftime` represents?

Let’s take a closer look at `amzn_strftime` and `christmas_amzn`

```python
print(amzn_strftime)
print(christmas_amzn)
```

Notice that both of the strings have a similar form, but that instead of actual
numerical values, `amzn_strftime` has *placeholders*

Specifically, anywhere the `%` shows up is a signal to the `pd.to_datetime`
function that it is where relevant information is stored

For example, the `%Y` is a stand-in for a four digit year, `%m` is for 2 a digit
month, and so on…

The official [Python
documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/library/datetime.html#strftime-and-strptime-behavior)
contains a complete list of possible `%`something patterns that are accepted in
the `format` argument

<a id='exercise-0'></a> **Exercise 1**

By referring to table found at the link above, figure out the correct argument
to pass as `format` in order to parse the dates in the next three cells below.

Test your work by passing your format string to `pd.to_datetime`.

```python
christmas_str2 = "2020:12:25"
```

```python
dbacks_win = "M:11 D:4 Y:2001 9:15 PM"
```

```python
america_bday = "America was born on July 4, 1776"
```

### Multiple Dates

`pd.to_datetime` can convert a collection (e.g. list, tuple, Series) of date
strings to dates in one go

```python
pd.to_datetime(["2020-12-25", "2020-12-31"])
```

We'll just do the one example b/c everything for one date applies to a
collection of dates

### `pd.date_range`

Often when working with multiple dates, they will be regularly spaced

Pandas provides the `date_range` function to help construct sequences of regularly spaced dates

There are two basic forms of calling `pd.date_range`:

```python
# first approach
pd.date_range(START, END, freq=FREQUENCY)


pd.date_range(START, periods=N, freq=FREQUENCY)
```

In the above examples 

- `START` and `END` represent anything `pd.to_datetime` can recognize as a date
- `FREQUENCY` is a frequency string like `"D"` for daily and `"A"` for annual
- `N` is an integer

Let's see how it works

```python
pd.date_range("2020-03-13", "2024-03-13", freq="A")
```

```python
pd.date_range("2020-04-01", "2020-04-25")  # default freq is "D"
```

```python
pd.date_range("2020-04-01", periods=25, freq="m")  # same as above
```

### Offset Aliases

The frequency arguments we've been passing are known as "offset aliases" in the pandas documentation

There are  *many* of them

Here we include a table (taken from [their documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/timeseries.html#offset-aliases))

| Alias    | Description                                      |
| -------- | ------------------------------------------------ |
| B        | business day frequency                           |
| C        | custom business day frequency                    |
| D        | calendar day frequency                           |
| W        | weekly frequency                                 |
| M        | month end frequency                              |
| SM       | semi-month end frequency (15th and end of month) |
| BM       | business month end frequency                     |
| CBM      | custom business month end frequency              |
| MS       | month start frequency                            |
| SMS      | semi-month start frequency (1st and 15th)        |
| BMS      | business month start frequency                   |
| CBMS     | custom business month start frequency            |
| Q        | quarter end frequency                            |
| BQ       | business quarter end frequency                   |
| QS       | quarter start frequency                          |
| BQS      | business quarter start frequency                 |
| A, Y     | year end frequency                               |
| BA, BY   | business year end frequency                      |
| AS, YS   | year start frequency                             |
| BAS, BYS | business year start frequency                    |
| BH       | business hour frequency                          |
| H        | hourly frequency                                 |
| T, min   | minutely frequency                               |
| S        | secondly frequency                               |
| L, ms    | milliseconds                                     |
| U, us    | microseconds                                     |
| N        | nanoseconds                                      |




Pandas also allows for "anchored offsets"

This are represented as a suffix on the offset alias that ties the date offset to a particular end of a range

For example `A` would return the last day of the year, while `A-MAR` would return the last day of March of each year

The list of anchored offsets is even longer, so we'll just provide a [link to the docs](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/timeseries.html#anchored-offsets)

## TimeDelta

Often we need to do arithmatic computations with datetime objects themselves

For example, we can subtract one date from another...

```python
new_year = pd.to_datetime("2020-01-01")
diff = christmas - new_year
print("diff is type", type(diff))
diff
```

`TimeDelta` objects represent the difference between two timestamps

They have various properties like days and seconds

```python
diff.days
```

```python
diff.seconds
```

Notice that `diff.seconds` was `0`

The difference was *exactly* 359 days, so no seconds were needed

If a `Timedelta` is added to a `Timestamp`, the result is a `Timestamp`:

```python
new_year + diff  # diff = christmas - new_year
```

`Timedelta`s can also do arithmetic with integers:

```python
10*diff
```

The interpretation of `N*diff` is the duration `diff` repeated `N` times

We often construct `Timedelta` by hand

```python
diff2 = pd.Timedelta(days=1, hours=4, minutes=3)
diff2
```

```python
diff2 + christmas
```

A common technique is to construct a variable representing a "standard" Timedelta of interest and then use scalar multiplication and addition to adjust dates

For example

```python
oneday = pd.Timedelta(days=1)
onehour = pd.Timedelta(hours=1)

oneday + onehour
```

```python
christmas + 365*oneday
```

```python
christmas + 365*oneday - onehour
```

## Date Formatting

We can use the `%`pattern format to have pandas write `datetime` objects as
specially formatted strings using the `strftime` (string format time) method

For example,

```python
christmas
```

```python
christmas.strftime("We love %A %B %d (also written %c)")
```

<a id='exercise-1'></a> **Exercise 2**

Use `pd.to_datetime` to express the birthday of one of your friends or family
members as a `datetime` object.

Then use the `strftime` method to write a message of the format:

```python
NAME's birthday is June 10, 1989 (a Saturday)
```

(where the name and date are replaced by the appropriate values)

## Extracting Data

Pandas is aware of when DataFrames or Series have dates on the index

In these cases it uses a special `DateTimeIndex` for the index

The special index comes with many convenient data access features

We will explore these now

It's easiest to understand how they work by example, so we'll load in some real
world data:

```python
# get data from quandl
btc_usd = quandl.get("BCHARTS/BITSTAMPUSD", start_date=start_date)

# ... or if you have network issues read from a file
# btc_usd = pd.read_csv("btc_usd.csv", parse_date=["Date"])

btc_usd.info()
btc_usd.head()
```

Here, we have the Bitcoin (BTC) to US dollar (USD) exchange rate from March 2014
until today.

Notice that the type of index is `DateTimeIndex`.

This is the key that enables things like…

Extracting all data for the year 2015 by passing `"2015"` to `.loc`.

```python
btc_usd.loc["2015"]
```

We can also narrow down to specific months.

```python
# By month's name
btc_usd.loc["August 2017"]
```

```python
# By month's number
btc_usd.loc["08/2017"]
```

Or even a day…

```python
# By date name
btc_usd.loc["August 1, 2020"]
```

```python
# By date number
btc_usd.loc["08-01-2020"]
```

**Question:** What can we pass as the `.loc` argument when we have a
`DateTimeIndex`?

**Answer:** Anything that can be converted to a `datetime` using
`pd.to_datetime`, *without* having to specify the format argument.

When we pass date-like objects to `.loc`, pandas returns *all* rows whose date
in the index "belong" to that date or period

We can also use the range shorthand notation to give a start and end date for
selection

```python
btc_usd.loc["April 1, 2015":"April 10, 2015"]
```

<a id='exercise-2'></a> **Exercise 3**

For each item in the list, extract the specified data from `btc_usd`:

- July 2017 through August 2017 (inclusive)  
- April 25, 2015 to June 10, 2016  
- October 31, 2017

## Accessing Date Properties


We can access parts of a date: e.g. the month, minute, second, or hour

When the date/time information is in the index, we can to `df.index.XX` where
`XX` is replaced by `year`, `month`, or whatever we would like to access.

```python
btc_usd.index.year
```

```python
btc_usd.index.day
```

We can also do the same if the date/time information is stored in a column, but
we have to use a slightly different syntax.

```python
df["column_name"].dt.XX
```

Let's see it in action:

```python
btc_date_column = btc_usd.reset_index()
btc_date_column.head()
```

```python
btc_date_column["Date"].dt.year.head()
```

```python
btc_date_column["Date"].dt.month.head()
```

## Leads and Lags: `df.shift`

When doing time series analysis, we often want to compare data at one date
against data at another date

pandas can help us with this if we leverage the `shift` method

Without any additional arguments, `shift()` will move all data *forward* one
period, filling the first row with missing data

```python
# so we can see the result of shift clearly
btc_usd.head()
```

```python
btc_usd.shift().head()
```

We can use this to compute the percent change from one day to the next

(Quiz: Why does that work? Remember how pandas uses the index to *align* data.)

```python
((btc_usd - btc_usd.shift()) / btc_usd.shift()).head()
```

Setting the first argument to `n` tells pandas to shift the data down `n` rows
(apply an `n` period lag).

```python
btc_usd.shift(3).head()
```

A negative value will shift the data *up* or apply a lead.

```python
btc_usd.shift(-2).head()
```

```python
btc_usd.shift(-2).tail()
```

<a id='exercise-3'></a> **Exercise 4**

Using the `shift` function, determine the week with the largest percent change
in the volume of trades (the `"Volume (BTC)"` column).

Repeat the analysis at the bi-weekly and monthly frequencies.

Hint 1: We have data at a *daily* frequency and one week is `7` days.

Hint 2: Approximate a month by 30 days.

```python
# your code here
```

## Rolling Computations: `.rolling`

pandas has facilities that enable easy computation of *rolling statistics*.

These are best understood by example, so we will dive right in.

```python
# first take only the first 6 rows so we can easily see what is going on
btc_small = btc_usd.head(6)
btc_small
```

Below, we compute the 2 day moving average (for all columns).

```python
btc_small
```

```python
btc_small.rolling("2d").mean()
```

To do this operation, pandas starts at each row (date) then looks *backwards*
the specified number of periods (here 2 days) and then applies some aggregation
function (`mean`) on all the data in that window.

If pandas cannot look back the full length of the window (e.g. when working on
the first row), it fills as much of the window as possible and then does the
operation. Notice that the value at 2014-05-01 is the same in both DataFrames.

Below, we see a visual depiction of the rolling maximum on a 21 day window for
the whole dataset.

```python
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(14, 8))
btc_usd["Open"].plot(ax=ax, linestyle="--", alpha=0.8)
btc_usd.rolling("21d").max()["Open"].plot(ax=ax, alpha=0.8, linewidth=3)
ax.legend(["Original", "21 day max"]);
```

We can also ask pandas to `apply` custom functions, similar to what we saw when
studying GroupBy.

```python
def is_volatile(x):
    "Returns a 1 if the variance is greater than 1, otherwise returns 0"
    if x.var() > 1.0:
        return 1.0
    else:
        return 0.0
```

```python
btc_small.rolling("2d").apply(is_volatile)
```

**Exercise 5**

Imagine that you have access to the [TARDIS time
machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TARDIS) from “Dr. Who”.

You are allowed to use the TARDIS only once, subject to the following
conditions:

- You may travel back to any day in the past.  
- On that day, you may purchase one bitcoin *at market open*.  
- You can then take the time machine 30 days into the future and sell your bitcoin *at market close*.  
- Then you return to the present, pocketing the profits.  

How would you pick the day?

Think carefully about what you would need to compute to make the optimal choice.
Try writing it out in the markdown cell below so you have a clear description of
the *want* operator that we will apply after the exercise.

(Note: **Don’t** look too far below, because in the next non-empty cell we have
written out our answer.)

To make this decision, we want to know …

**Your answer here**

To make the optimal decision, we need to know the maximum difference between the
close price at the end of the window and the open price at the start of the
window.

**Exercise 6**

Do the following:

1. Write a pandas function that implements your strategy.  
1. Pass it to the `agg` method of `rolling_btc`.  
1. Extract the `"Open"` column from the result.  
1. Find the date associated with the maximum value in that column.  


How much money did you make?

```python
def daily_value(df):
    # DELETE `pass` below and replace it with your code
    pass

rolling_btc = btc_usd.rolling("30d")

# do steps 2-4 here
```

## Changing Frequencies: `.resample`

In addition to computing rolling statistics, we can also change the frequency of
the data.

For example, instead of a monthly moving average, suppose that we wanted to
compute the average *within* each calendar month.

We will use the `resample` method to do this.

Below are some examples.

```python
# business quarter
btc_usd.resample("BQ").mean()
```

Note that unlike with `rolling`, a single number is returned for each column for
each quarter.

The `resample` method will alter the frequency of the data and the number of
rows in the result will be different from the number of rows in the input.

On the other hand, with `rolling`, the size and frequency of the result are the
same as the input.

We can sample at other frequencies and aggregate with multiple aggregations
function at once.

```python
# multiple functions at 2 start-of-quarter frequency
btc_usd.resample("2BQS").agg(["min", "max"])
```

As with `groupby` and `rolling`, you can also provide custom functions to
`.resample(...).agg` and `.resample(...).apply`

**Exercise 7**

Now suppose you still have access to the TARDIS, but the conditions are slightly
different.

You may now:

- Travel back to the *first day* of any month in the past.  
- On that day, you may purchase one bitcoin *at market open*.  
- You can then travel to any day *in that month* and sell the bitcoin *at market close*.  
- Then return to the present, pocketing the profits.  

To which month would you travel? On which day of that month would you return to
sell the bitcoin?

Determine what you would need to compute to make the optimal choice. Try writing
it out in the markdown cell below so you have a clear description of the *want*
operator that we will apply after the exercise.

(Note: **Don’t** look too many cells below, because we have written out our
answer.)

To make the optimal decision we need …

**Your answer here**

To make the optimal decision we need to, for each month, compute the maximum
value of the close price on any day minus the open price on the first day of the
month.

**Exercise 8**

Do the following:

1. Write a pandas function that implements your strategy.  
1. Pass it to the `agg` method of `resampled_btc`.  
1. Extract the `"Open"` column from the result.  
1. Find the date associated with the maximum value in that column.  


How much money did you make? Compare with your neighbor.

Was this strategy more profitable than the previous one? By how much?

```python
def monthly_value(df):
    # DELETE `pass` below and replace it with your code
    pass

resampled_btc = btc_usd.resample("MS")

# Do steps 2-4 here
```

## Optional: API keys

Recall above that we had the line of code:

```python
quandl.ApiConfig.api_key = "Dn6BtVoBhzuKTuyo6hbp"
```

This line told the `quandl` library that when obtaining making requests for
data, it should use the *API key* `Dn6BtVoBhzuKTuyo6hbp`.

An API key is a sort of password that web services (like the Quandl API) require
you to provide when you make requests.

Using this password, we were able to make a request to Quandl to obtain data
directly from them.

The API key used here is one that we requested on behalf of this course.

If you plan to use Quandl more extensively, you should obtain your own personal
API key from [their
website](https://docs.quandl.com/docs#section-authentication) and re-run the
`quandl.ApiConfig.api_key...` line of code with your new API key on the
right-hand side.

